{\rtf1\ansi
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Italic;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Bold;}
{\colortbl;\red164\green0\blue199;\red237\green54\blue36;\red0\green115\blue59;}
{\*\listtable}
{\*\listoverridetable}
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \pard\tx0\tx500\tx1000\tx1500\tx2000\tx2500\tx3000\tx3500\tx4000\tx4500\tx5000\tx5500\tx6000\ql\fi0\li0
Mi viaje espan\uc0\u771 ol simple stories in Spanish\cf1 \
https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/simple-stories-in-spanish/id1497441201?i=1000600709249\
\
https://smalltownspanishteacher.com/2023/02/21/simple-stories-in-spanish-mi-viaje-espanol/\
\
\cf0 0:51\cf1 \
Cuando yo ten\uc0\u237 a catorce (14) a\uc0\u241 os, tuve la oportunidad de aprender un idioma. En mi escuela, solo hab\uc0\u237 a dos opciones: espa\uc0\u241 ol o alem\uc0\u225 n. Decid\uc0\u237  tomar el espa\uc0\u241 ol porque cre\uc0\u237 a, a los catorce a\uc0\u241 os, que era un idioma m\uc0\u225 s atractivo que el alem\uc0\u225 n, m\uc0\u225 s rom\uc0\u225 ntico.\cf2 \
\cf0 \
\cf3 When I was fourteen years old, I had the opportunity to learn a language. In my school, there were only two options: Spanish or German. I decided to take Spanish because, at the age of fourteen, I believed it was a more attractive language than German, more romantic.\f1\i \
\f0\i0 \cf0 \
1:31\
\cf1 El primer a\uc0\u241 o de espa\uc0\u241 ol no fue f\uc0\u225 cil. Tuve que aprender mucha informaci\uc0\u243 n de memoria. Tuve listas de vocabulario y conjugaciones de verbos. No sab\uc0\u237 a c\uc0\u243 mo poner este informaci\uc0\u243 n en contexto. Hasta ese punto, la escuela me fue muy f\uc0\u225 cil. El espa\uc0\u241 ol fue mi primera clase desafiante y no fue un fracaso completo, pero no hice bien en la clase. \cf0 \
\
\cf3 The first year of Spanish was not easy. I had to learn a lot of information by heart. I had vocabulary and verb conjugation lists. I didn't know how to put information in context. Up until that point, school had been very easy for me. Spanish was my first challenging class and it was not a complete failure, but I didn't do well.\
\cf0 \
2:24\
\cf1 A pesar de no comprender mucho del espa\uc0\u241 ol, me gust\uc0\u243  la clase. Me gustaron los videos que miramos sobre las culturas. Me gust\uc0\u243  aprender de la comida. Sobre todo, me gust\uc0\u243  la m\uc0\u250 sica que escuchamos.\
\f1\i \cf0 \
\cf3 Despite not understanding much Spanish, I liked the class. I liked the videos we watched about cultures. I liked learning about food. Most of all, I liked the music we listened to.\f0\i0 \cf0 \
\
2:49\
\cf1 Decid\uc0\u237  seguir mis estudios en el espa\uc0\u241 ol y me inscrib\uc0\u237  para el segundo a\uc0\u241 o. Tuve un maestro diferente el segundo a\uc0\u241 o. Todav\uc0\u237 a fue mucha gram\uc0\u225 tica y vocabulario. Tuve mucha tarea para la clase. Recuerdo distintamente que para cada pregunta en el libro, tuve que copiar la pregunta en espa\uc0\u241 ol, traducir la pregunta al ingl\uc0\u233 s, responder a la pregunta en espa\uc0\u241 ol y traducir mi respuesta al ingl\uc0\u233 s.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 I decided to continue my studies in Spanish and enrolled for the second year. I had a different teacher the second year. It was still a lot of grammar and vocabulary. I had a lot of homework for the class. I distinctly remember that for each question in the book, I had to copy the question in Spanish, translate the question into English, answer the question in Spanish, and translate my answer into English.\f1\i \
\f0\i0 \cf0 \
3:42\
\cf1 Mientras trabaj\uc0\u225 bamos en las pr\uc0\u225 cticas de gram\uc0\u225 tica y vocabulario, mi maestro, Se\uc0\u241 or Frankl\uc0\u237 n, sacaba su guitarra y nos cantaba. Le gustaba mucho cantar las canciones de los Eagles, como Desperado. La tarea de copiar y traducir fue menos terrible con la m\uc0\u250 sica en vivo.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 While we worked on grammar and vocabulary exercises, my teacher, Mr. Franklin, would take out his guitar and sing to us. He loved to sing Eagles songs, like "Desperado". The task of copying and translating was less terrible with live music.\cf0 \
\
4:14\
\cf1 Durante mi segundo a\uc0\u241 o del espa\uc0\u241 ol, fui con el coro a Nueva York. All\uc0\u225  tuve una experiencia que me impact\uc0\u243 . Visitamos la Estatua de la Libertad y la Isla Ellis. En esos dos lugares, hab\uc0\u237 a gente de todo el mundo. Soy de un pueblo peque\uc0\u241 o en el norte de Minnesota. Tuvimos unos estudiantes extranjeros, pero al visitar estas islas y ver todas esas personas y o\uc0\u237 r todos esos idiomas, me di cuenta del tama\uc0\u241 o del mundo. O\uc0\u237  varios idiomas y quer\uc0\u237 a ser como ellos. Quer\uc0\u237 a hablar y comprender m\uc0\u225 s que solo el ingl\uc0\u233 s.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 During my second year of Spanish, I went with the choir to New York. There I had an experience that impacted me. We visited the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island. In those two places, there were people from all over the world. I'm from a small town in northern Minnesota. We had a few foreign exchange students, but visiting these islands and seeing all those people and hearing all those languages, I realized the size of the world. I heard several languages and wanted to be like them. I wanted to speak and understand more than just English.\cf0 \
\
5:28\
\cf1 Hab\uc0\u237 a otra muchacha en el coro que estaba en mi clase de espa\uc0\u241 ol. Ella y yo tratamos de hablar en espa\uc0\u241 ol para ser \uc0\u8220 ch\uc0\u233 vere\uc0\u8221  como los turistas que hablaron otros idiomas. En ese momento, decid\uc0\u237  que iba a tomar otro a\uc0\u241 o de espa\uc0\u241 ol.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 There was another girl in the choir who was in my Spanish class. She and I tried to speak in Spanish to be "cool" like the tourists who spoke other languages. At that moment, I decided to take another year of Spanish.\cf0 \
\
5:56\
\cf1 En mi tercer a\uc0\u241 o de espa\uc0\u241 ol, todo el vocabulario y gram\uc0\u225 tica de los primeros dos a\uc0\u241 os empez\uc0\u243  a tener sentido en mi mente por una raz\uc0\u243 n: cuentos. En mi tercer a\uc0\u241 o de espa\uc0\u241 ol le\uc0\u237 mos, y le\uc0\u237 mos mucho. Le\uc0\u237 mos cuentos cortos y novelas como una versi\uc0\u243 n simplificado de \uc0\u171 Lazarillo de Tormes\uc0\u187 . Cuando le\uc0\u237 , comprend\uc0\u237  todas las palabras y formaciones de verbos que no hab\uc0\u237 a comprendido antes.\
\cf0 \
\cf3 In my third year of Spanish, all the vocabulary and grammar from the first two years began to make sense in my mind for one reason: stories. In my third year of Spanish, we read, and we read a lot. We read short stories and novels like a simplified version of "Lazarillo de Tormes." When I read, I understood all the words and verb forms that I had not understood before.\cf0 \
\
6:51\
\cf1 Descubr\uc0\u237  un amor por el espa\uc0\u241 ol. Quer\uc0\u237 a estudiar. Compr\uc0\u233  discos compactos de Ricky Martin y Shakira (eran los a\uc0\u241 os noventa) y los escuch\uc0\u233  todo el tiempo, bailando y cantando con ellos. Tuvimos unos estudiantes extranjeros en la escuela. Uno era de Espa\uc0\u241 a y uno era de Colombia. Practiqu\uc0\u233  mi espa\uc0\u241 ol con ellos cuando posible y aprend\uc0\u237  mucho de esas conversaciones.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 I discovered a love for Spanish. I wanted to study it. I bought CDs of Ricky Martin and Shakira (it was the nineties) and listened to them all the time, dancing and singing with them. We had some foreign students at school. One was from Spain and one was from Colombia. I practiced my Spanish with them when possible and learned a lot from those conversations.\f1\i \
\f0\i0 \cf0 \
7:34\f1\i \cf3 \
\f0\i0 \cf1 En clase mi cuarto (4th) a\uc0\u241 o, miramos m\uc0\u225 s pel\uc0\u237 culas y estudiamos las culturas precolombinas de las Am\uc0\u233 ricas. Jugamos Scrabble en espa\uc0\u241 ol y aprendimos poemas de memoria. Durante ese a\uc0\u241 o decid\uc0\u237  que iba a estudiar el espa\uc0\u241 ol en la universidad para hacerme maestra.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 In my fourth year of class, we watched more movies and studied the pre-Columbian cultures of the Americas. We played Scrabble in Spanish and learned poems by heart. During that year, I decided that I was going to study Spanish in college to become a teacher.\cf0 \
\cf1 \
\cf0 8:07\cf1 \
Cuando ten\uc0\u237 a dieciocho (18) a\uc0\u241 os, fui a Concordia College en Moorhead, Minnesota para estudiar el espa\uc0\u241 ol y el teatro. Tom\uc0\u233  clases de gram\uc0\u225 tica, literatura, cine y traducci\uc0\u243 n.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 When I was eighteen (18) years old, I went to Concordia College in Moorhead, Minnesota to study Spanish and theater. I took classes in grammar, literature, film, and translation.\cf0 \
\
8:25\
\cf1 En el a\uc0\u241 o dos mil dos (2002) fui a Espa\uc0\u241 a para pasar un semestre. Asist\uc0\u237  a la Universidad de Navarra en Pamplona porque ten\uc0\u237 a un programa de intercambio con Concordia.\cf0 \
\
\f1\i \cf3 In the year two thousand two (2002), I went to Spain to spend a semester. I attended the University of Navarra in Pamplona because they had an exchange program with Concordia.\cf0 \
\f0\i0 \
8:45\
\cf1 Hice muchos amigos en Espa\uc0\u241 a y tom\uc0\u233  clases de\f2\b  \f0\b0 literatura, geograf\uc0\u237 a, historia y gram\uc0\u225 tica. Particip\uc0\u233  en eventos en la universidad e hice excursiones con mis nuevos amigos. Practiqu\uc0\u233  todo el tiempo y me enamor\uc0\u233  del espa\uc0\u241 ol a\uc0\u250 n m\uc0\u225 s.\cf0 \
\f1\i \cf3 \
\f0\i0 I made many friends in Spain and took classes in literature, geography, history, and grammar. I participated in events at the university and went on excursions with my new friends. I practiced all the time and fell in love with Spanish even more.\cf0 \
\
9:13\
\cf1 Vivir en Espa\uc0\u241 a fue una gran experiencia. Viv\uc0\u237  con una familia encantadora. La madre de la familia era de Valencia y prepar\uc0\u243  la mejor paella. El padre vio partidos de f\uc0\u250 tbol en las noches. Me gust\uc0\u243  el equipo de Galicia. \uc0\u161 Su portero era muy guapo!\cf0 \
\
\cf3 Living in Spain was a great experience. I lived with a lovely family. The mother of the family was from Valencia and made the best paella. The father watched soccer matches at night. I liked the Galician team. Their goalkeeper was very handsome!\cf0 \
\
9:42\
\cf1 Volv\uc0\u237  a los Estados Unidos determinada a seguir con el espa\uc0\u241 ol. Tuve profesores excelentes en la universidad que ven\uc0\u237 an de varios pa\uc0\u237 ses, incluyendo Paraguay, Chile, M\uc0\u233 xico, Espa\uc0\u241 a, Per\uc0\u250  y Minnesota. Cuando me gradu\uc0\u233  de la universidad, encontr\uc0\u233  un trabajo y empec\uc0\u233  a ense\uc0\u241 ar.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 I returned to the United States determined to continue with my Spanish studies. I had excellent professors in college who came from various countries, including Paraguay, Chile, Mexico, Spain, Peru, and Minnesota. When I graduated from college, I found a job and started teaching.\cf0 \
\
10:15\
\cf1 En dos mil catorce (2014), decid\uc0\u237  volver a mis estudios y obtener mi maestr\uc0\u237 a, o posgrado, en la ense\uc0\u241 anza del espa\uc0\u241 ol. Mis hijos ten\uc0\u237 an tres a\uc0\u241 os y dos meses cuando empec\uc0\u233  mi primera clase en l\uc0\u237 nea, pero me esforc\uc0\u233  y termin\uc0\u233  el programa en dos a\uc0\u241 os.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 In two thousand fourteen (2014), I decided to return to my studies and obtain my master's degree in teaching Spanish. My children were three years old and two months old when I started my first online class, but I worked hard and completed the program in two years.\cf0 \
\
10:46\
\cf1 Como parte de mi maestr\uc0\u237 a, pas\uc0\u233  dos semanas en clases en Costa Rica. Tambi\uc0\u233 n estudi\uc0\u233  m\uc0\u225 s de la historia pol\uc0\u237 tica de Latinoam\uc0\u233 rica y el cine hispano.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 As part of my master's degree, I spent two weeks in classes in Costa Rica. I also studied more about the political history of Latin America and Hispanic cinema.\cf0 \
\
11:00\cf1    \
Mi viaje espa\uc0\u241 ol no se ha acabado. Sigo estudiando el espa\uc0\u241 ol todo el tiempo. Escucho a m\uc0\u250 sica, miro programas, leo y hablo en espa\uc0\u241 ol todos los d\uc0\u237 as. A veces se me olvidan unas reglas de gram\uc0\u225 tica y necesito investigar y practicar un poco.\cf0 \
\
\cf3 My Spanish journey is not over. I continue to study Spanish all the time. I listen to music, watch shows, read, and speak in Spanish every day. Sometimes, I forget some grammar rules and need to research and practice a bit.\cf0 \
\
11:35\
\cf1 El espa\uc0\u241 ol ha sido parte de mi vida por veinticinco (25) a\uc0\u241 os ahora. Estoy agradecida que empec\uc0\u233  mi viaje espa\uc0\u241 ol y que decid\uc0\u237  ser maestra. No puedo imaginar mi vida de otra manera. Hablar el espa\uc0\u241 ol ha abierto puertas, ha causado amistades que no tendr\uc0\u237 a sin el espa\uc0\u241 ol. Y aprender el espa\uc0\u241 ol me da la oportunidad de compartir este viaje con ustedes y compartir este deseo de aprender y comunicar con el mundo y estoy agradecida por eso todos los d\uc0\u237 as.\
\
\cf3 Spanish has been a part of my life for twenty-five (25) years now. I am grateful that I started my Spanish journey and decided to become a teacher. I can't imagine my life any other way. Speaking Spanish has opened doors, has caused friendships that I wouldn't have without Spanish. And learning Spanish gives me the opportunity to share this journey with you and share this desire to learn and communicate with the world, and I am grateful for that every day.\f1\i \
\
\cf0 \
\f2\fs36\b\i0 Vocabulary words : Clues crossword puzzle style. \f1\fs24\b0\i \
\cf1 \
\f0\i0 alem\uc0\u225 n\
Un idioma que era otra opci\uc0\u243 n para aprender en la escuela, pero que no eligi\uc0\u243 .\
\cf3 A language that was another option to learn at school, but not chosen.\cf1 \
\
gram\uc0\u225 tica\
La estructura de un idioma, que incluye reglas para formar oraciones y frases.\
\cf3 The structure of a language, including rules for forming sentences and phrases.\cf1 \
\
vocabulario\
Las palabras y t\uc0\u233 rminos que forman un idioma, aprendidos a trav\uc0\u233 s de listas en clase.\
\cf3 The words and terms that make up a language, learned through class lists.\cf1 \
\
cultura\
Las tradiciones, comida y m\uc0\u250 sica de los pa\uc0\u237 ses hispanohablantes estudiados en clase.\
\cf3 The traditions, food, and music of Spanish-speaking countries studied in class.\
\cf1 \
tarea\
El trabajo asignado a los estudiantes para practicar gram\uc0\u225 tica y vocabulario en casa.\
\cf3 The work assigned to students to practice grammar and vocabulary at home.\cf1 \
\
conjugaciones\
Las variaciones de los verbos dependiendo del sujeto y el tiempo verbal.\
\cf3 The variations of verbs depending on the subject and verb tense.\cf1 \
\
Estatua de la Libertad\
Un monumento visitado por la autora que le mostr\uc0\u243  la diversidad del mundo.\
\cf3 A monument visited by the author that showed her the diversity of the world.\cf1 \
\
turistas\
Personas que viajan y, en este caso, hablan diferentes idiomas que inspiraron a la autora.\
\cf3 People who travel and, in this case, speak different languages that inspired the author.\cf1 \
\
cuentos\
Historias cortas le\uc0\u237 das en clase que ayudaron a la autora a entender mejor el espa\uc0\u241 ol.\
\cf3 Short stories read in class that helped the author better understand Spanish.\cf1 \
\
\
estudiantes extranjeros\
Compa\uc0\u241 eros de escuela de otros pa\uc0\u237 ses con quienes practic\uc0\u243  su espa\uc0\u241 ol.\
\cf3 Schoolmates from other countries with whom she practiced her Spanish.\cf1 \
\
paella\
Un plato tradicional espa\uc0\u241 ol que la madre de la familia anfitriona preparaba.\
\cf3 A traditional Spanish dish prepared by the host family\uc0\u8217 s mother.\
\cf1 \
f\uc0\u250 tbol\
Un deporte que el padre de la familia anfitriona ve\uc0\u237 a por las noches.\
\cf3 A sport the host family\uc0\u8217 s father watched in the evenings.\cf1 \
\
\
historia pol\uc0\u237 tica\
Un tema que la autora estudi\uc0\u243  para entender mejor Latinoam\uc0\u233 rica.\
\cf3 A subject the author studied to better understand Latin America.\cf1 \
\
cine hispano\
Pel\uc0\u237 culas de habla hispana que explor\uc0\u243  como parte de sus estudios avanzados.\
\cf3 Spanish-language films explored as part of her advanced studies.\
\cf1 \
maestr\uc0\u237 a\
Un grado avanzado en la ense\uc0\u241 anza del espa\uc0\u241 ol que la autora complet\uc0\u243 .\
\cf3 An advanced degree in teaching Spanish that the author completed.\cf1 \
\
vida\
La experiencia personal y profesional de la autora, profundamente influenciada por el espa\uc0\u241 ol.\
\cf3 The author\uc0\u8217 s personal and professional experience, deeply influenced by Spanish.\cf1 \
\
amigos\
Relaciones personales que la autora form\uc0\u243  gracias a su habilidad para hablar espa\uc0\u241 ol.\
\cf3 Personal relationships the author formed thanks to her ability to speak Spanish.\cf1 \
\
puertas\
Oportunidades en la vida que se abrieron para la autora por aprender espa\uc0\u241 ol.\
\cf3 Opportunities in life that opened for the author through learning Spanish.\cf1 \
\
viaje\
El proceso continuo de aprendizaje y ense\uc0\u241 anza del espa\uc0\u241 ol que ha sido parte de su vida.\
\cf3 The ongoing process of learning and teaching Spanish that has been part of her life.\cf1 \
\cf3 \
\f1\i \
\
\f0\i0 \cf0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}